---
layout: post
title:  "Product Development Lessons from a Nerd's Revenge Story"
date:   2021-02-19 8:00:00 -0800
tags: tech gaming
---
Back in the early 2000s, I played an online game where I had the chance to develop a product from ideation all the way to execution. In this post, I'd like to share some lessons I learned from that experience. The product was revenge.

## An Overview of Earth 2025
[Earth 2025](https://annex.fandom.com/wiki/Earth:_2025) was a turn-based strategy game where players built a country. Players could spend their turns doing things like attacking another country, exploring for land, researching technology, building, and others. Players also had to manage cashflow and food supplies to make sure the country stayed solvent. Different buildings and government types gave benefits to different country attributes, making a wide variety of strategies tenable, including research-focused, farming, and industrial production.

Players received a turn every 20 minutes, and could save up to 126 turns for immediate use and another 120 turns stored to be released with regular turns every 20 minutes as long as space in the first pool was available. Players could also get six bonus turns for not logging into the game for at least 18 hours.

Game rounds would last for two months and then the game would reset. For the first 100 turns, a country would be safe from being attacked by other countries. After that, they would free to attack and be attacked by any country from half their size to twice their size.

## The Earth 2025 Metagame
Within the game, people could join clans made of other countries. Most of these clans had out-of-game infrastructure like message boards, knowledge repositories, and other tools to support running countries. Clans also had diplomatic relations with each other to control what happened during a round. Generally, there were two ways clans would spend their rounds. In a "war" round, a clan or group of clans would attack another group and attempt to destroy as many countries as possible. In a "netting" round, clans would try to avoid conflict and grow their countries as large as possible to earn spots on the top 10 and top 100 lists of highest net worth countries.

Almost all major clans would have some kind of agreement for reciprocal attacks if a member of one clan attacked a member of another, usually on a sliding scale starting from three return attacks for the first attack. More substantial agreements fell roughly in two categories. An Unbreakable Non-Aggression Pact (UNAP) was basically a guarantee to not declare war between the two clans. A Defensive Pact was an agreement between two clans to mutually fight any aggressor on either of them.

## Prologue
One round of the game, our clan, which had around 100 members and was called Elysium, was planning on netting. A netting round is very laid-back, as players generally have to login once every day or two at their leisure to play their turns. Warring rounds, on the other hand, are a lot more intense, as players generally play at set times to coordinate attacks on enemy countries and, furthermore, can be on call lists to log in if their country comes under attack to try and protect it.

Unfortunately, a somewhat friendly clan to ours broke a UNAP halfway through the round, taking our clan by surprise. That started an unexpected war with the aptly named clan, Moral Decay, who had roughly 130 members. Though we gave a good accounting of ourselves, the war was an unambiguous loss.

## Step 1: Selling the Vision to Stakeholders
Not long after the start of the war several members of the clan began to plot our revenge. Taking our revenge wasn't a sure thing. Because war rounds are so stressful, many clans, including ours, tried to interleave netting rounds with war rounds to prevent player burn-out. A winning war usually resulted in some attrition and a losing war resulted in even more. Since we had been planning a netting round, adding another war round would put us at three war rounds in a row, something only the most war-hungry clans did. It was also likely that Moral Decay would offer us a UNAP again so they could avoid multiple war rounds in a row.

Since it wasn't a foregone conclusion that revenge was in the cards, we took two approaches to sell that vision to the rest of the clan.

### Set the Narrative Using Data
Obviously, the first step in setting the narrative was easy - our enemy broke a diplomatic norm to launch a surprise attack on us. They were the evil monsters with no shame. On the other hand, we were the outstanding warriors holding our own against overwhelming odds after a sinister sneak attack.

To support the claim that we were better fighters, we pulled some data from the ongoing war. First, we showed everyone that in the last two weeks of the war, the enemy failed more kills than they finished, but we kept up a steady tempo. Second, our metrics - total kills, country net worth killed, number of attacks - all outpaced theirs in the last two weeks. Finally, the country count in our clan was actually higher than their country count. The reason this is significant is that players can start a new country if their's gets destroyed, but a lot of players will stop restarting after the first or multiple losses. This inversion shows that our clan had a higher stomach for continuing the fight, even considering they were winning the war.

### Build Confidence in the Development Plan
To take on a larger clan, we needed to put together two key elements. First, we needed to be really confident that we would be able to strike first. Second, our countries had to be significantly better than theirs.

The pathway to achieving these elements was tightly coupled. Conventional wisdom in the game was that wars start at the end of week 4. This gives countries sufficient time to prepare for the conflict and also limits the length of the war to the last 4 weeks of the round. Unfortunately, this convention combined with practical constraints meant that the first strikes of wars were very predictable: usually starting on the fourth Thursday, Friday, or Saturday of a round so that the weekend could be used to deal as much damage as possible. It was not uncommon for two opponents to be online at the same time trying to execute their first strikes on each other.

Naturally, one way to guarantee we would hit first was to strike earlier. You don't want to start the war at the beginning of the round because you don't have much time to build up an advantage over new countries and it also means you'll spend the whole eight weeks fighting. We decided to launch our attack at the end of week three. Since this was so uncommon, we would have a huge surprise advantage, and most of their countries would be caught off guard. However, we would also have 25% less turns to prepare our countries than most people were used to, which would require a significant change in how countries were run. It was obvious to everyone that a week three attack brought significant advantages, so long as we could get our countries ready in time.

To get our countries optimized for the new timeline, we turned to a project that a few of us had been developing in the background: a game simulator built in MATLAB. This simulator allowed us to test turn-by-turn recipes and estimate how the resulting country would turn out. The game, after all, was based on a series of formulas, many of which had been determined empirically over time.

By testing and tweaking hundreds of recipes, we were able to determine several that outperformed conventional recipes, even at the four-week mark (I'm sad to say that all of these recipes were tweaked by hand, not by any intelligent algorithm). We could also show what our advantage would be at week three over recipes targeting a week four start date.

We presented a set of recipes and told people how many missiles they could expect to have, along with troops, cash, tanks, food, and other important metrics if they followed one of the recipes. One specific recipe focused on developing countries that were good at spying, which is a specialization in the game that's critical to preparing for war because those countries allow you to obtain status reports for enemy countries. The spy specialists in our clan were so incredulous that our spy recipe could hit the numbers we claimed that I agreed to personally run the recipe on my country as proof of my confidence. Luckily, one of the senior members of the spy group helped me to convince most of the rest to run the recipe with me and we ended up with 30% better numbers than the people who didn't.

The combination of a conventional-wisdom-breaking attack plan with evidence-based recipes for improved country building convinced the clan to go forward with the revenge plan. For my trouble, I accepted the job of "Secretary of War" to put the plan into action. When it came time for the clan diplomats to setup the agreements for the following round, we rejected Moral Decay's offer of a new UNAP, and then rejected them again when they begged us to accept.


## Step 2: Execute the Development Plan
Keeping 90 people on plan requires a lot of coordination (roughly 10 people had decided to take a break after the previous war). In addition to providing step-by-step instructions to every player to follow, we also set up tooling and processes to make sure everyone was uploading status reports so we could monitor progress and verify that the different recipes were having the expected outcomes.

To stay on top of everyone, we relied on Elysium's pre-existing hierarchy. The clan was divided into five councils of roughly twenty members each. Every council had a leader and assistant who were experienced players that could provide guidance to their cohort and would be able to check on individual progress to see that things were on track.

We also introduced some gamification for both uploading of status reports and for hitting certain benchmarks. By the last day of the preparation period, we had 100% coverage of country status reports and around 90% of countries were within the targeted ranges for country preparation. Most of the remaining 10% had chosen not to follow a recommended recipe.

## Step 3: Deploy the Product and Measure the Results
The third Friday of the round finally arrived. Around two-thirds of the clan gathered for a late afternoon strike. For the first time, our clan planned a pre-strike spy operation to gather intel on every enemy country. Using that information, we prioritized targets for the strike, focusing on countries with high military strength, high cash reserves, and one country we had failed to get intel on, suggesting this was their top spy. Combined with our information of our own countries, we could estimate the number of countries we would be able to destroy during our strike to make sure the high-threat countries were removed.

In the first 24 hours, we were able to destroy around 40 enemy countries, negating their numbers advantage. Since those were also their best countries, we also drove a significant advantage in military strength. By the end of the first weekend, 60 enemy countries had been destroyed and we achieved what was called a "tag-kill" in under two weeks, meaning all of the original countries in their clan had been destroyed. We only ended up losing about 20 countries in the first two weeks of the war. Moral Decay never had more than 50 countries in their clan for the rest of the round.

## Final Thoughts
Our revenge strike was an overwhelming and surprising success. Not only did we soundly defeat a substantially larger opponent, we also cemented the clan's reputation as a strong war-fighting organization. We also brought credibility to the week three war strategy, and earlier wars became more common in subsequent rounds.

The key factors in our success were the alignment of the organization around the cause and commitment to accountability during the development phase. We were able to convince the organization to commit to a sustained effort by setting a mission ("get revenge") and demonstrating a well thought-out and evidence-based strategy for achieving our goals. The enthusiasm for achieving the mission drove individual contributors to meet benchmarks for both development goals and reporting. Leadership accountability through regular organizational-level reviews and commitment to their own development benchmarks set an example to the group, ensuring a commitment to success.

When it finally became time to launch the product (i.e. attack our enemy), organizational readiness and confidence was so high that the probability of failure became minimal. Furthermore, excitement in the product allowed us to organically grow a deep bench of operational experts, who wanted to learn every detail about how to plan and prioritize in the same way that lead to such great success.