---
layout: post
title:  "How to Value Your Options Like Lottery Tickets"
date:   2022-11-06 8:00:00 -0800
tags: tech
---
Whenever there's a discussion about how to value stock options on The Internet, whether in the context of comparing job offers, discussing the relative merits of working at startups vs big corps, or what have you, you invariably see three common approaches:

1. The Overly Optimistic Valuation. "My offer includes options for 100k shares and the recruiter said this company is a rocket ship, and they expect to IPO at $1,000 per share in the next couple of years, so even being conservative, this is like $50M." Most people agree it's not a smart idea to value your options at the highest multiple you heard anyone mention.
2. The Worthless Paper Valuation. "I just value the options at nothing and base my decision on the base salary." While probably safer for your financial health, still leads to non-optimal decision making, which I'll touch on later.
3. Startup Options are Lottery Tickets. "I just treat startup options as if they were lottery tickets." This glib statement implies there is an accepted strategy to value lottery tickets. I will explore that idea in this post.

## Getting Paid in Lottery Tickets, a Thought Experiment.
Imagine getting a job offer from one of the hot new startups. They have an intriguing new compensation strategy. You will receive a base salary and target bonus, as you would at many other companies. However, they will offer you a choice in receiving additional compensation in your choice of startup options or Powerball Lottery tickets. How do you figure out what to do? How will you negotiate either approach?

### Some Powerball Background
[Powerball](https://powerball.com/) is a multi-state lottery, that together with [MegaMillions](https://www.megamillions.com/), occasionally produces very large jackpot numbers. The two games have very similar probability and payout structures, but for the purposes of this post, I have used only Powerball numbers.

Powerball is drawn three days a week (Monday, Wednesday, Saturday) by selecting 5 distinct numbers from 1 to 69 (inclusive) and one number from 1 to 26 (inclusive), the Powerball. You can see the complete payout and probabilities [here](https://www.calottery.com/draw-games/powerball#section-content-4-3), but the main pieces of interest are that the jackpot probability is 1 in 292,201,338 and the probability of winning any amount is 1 in 24.87.

The price of a single ticket (without any add-ons, which I'm ignoring here) is $2. The expected value (EV) of non-jackpot prizes is fixed for any ticket and is $0.32. Jackpot EVs change with time, but if we look at the cash value option for 2018 and 2019 jackpots, the EV is $0.36 if you bought 1 ticket for every Saturday drawing. That gives a total EV of $0.68.

### Valuing the Lottery Option
For the sake of argument, let's make the specifics of the option more concrete. You will receive a set number of lottery tickets every Friday for the next drawing on Saturday. How many tickets per week do you ask for?

One option is to take the amount of money you want to receive from this part of your compensation package, divide by 52 weeks per year and the EV per ticket. For $35k per year, this becomes roughly 1000 tickets per week.

However this strategy has an obvious flaw, which is that more than half of the EV comes from the jackpot, which you have a very low chance of winning. So you can instead divide by the non-jackpot EV of $0.32 and come to 2100 tickets per week. Still, much of the EV is coming from lower probability outcomes, and even at 1000 tickets per week, you may not amortize that in a year.

Another way is to look at payouts at different quantiles for a number of tickets per week. If we go back to 1000 tickets per week, the median result over two years (replaying the same data mentioned above), is $19,500 and the 95th percentile is $69,700. So if your goal had been $35,000 per year, you would only have hit your goal if you were one of the top 5% most lucky lottery players. And your employer would have paid $208,000 for those lottery tickets.

At 2000 tickets per week, the median is $39,000 over two years.

At 4000 tickets per week, the median is $78,500 over two years.

So if you ask for 4000 tickets per week, you have a bit better than 50% chance of hitting your two-year target of $70,000, at a cost of $832,000 over those 2 years for the tickets.

## Should you value your options at $0 - An Interlude
There are two pretty good reasons why you shouldn't value your options at zero dollars.

The first is that if you value options at $0 and then act rationally on that valuation, it leads to some pretty bad decision making. Example 1: you should value $1 in base salary more than options for all of the stock in the company. Example 2: you should value options for 10 shares in a series A company the same as options for 1,000 shares in a series E company.

The second is that you are probably not implicitly valuing them at zero anyway. There are many things to think about when comparing job offers. Maybe one company has a better tech stack. Maybe one has a better workplace culture. But if you are starting compare which one has a larger total addressable market or which one is likely to succeed, maybe you are also starting to think one company's options might be worth more in the future. So why not make that value system explicit and apply it to all of your choices?

## Now Value Your Options Like Lottery Tickets
There are two key differences between valuing stock options vs the lottery ticket compensation package.

First, the lottery ticket payouts and probabilities are known. Obviously, future prices of stocks are not.

Second, every lottery ticket is drawn independently. If you sign on with a company, all of your stock options have the same, unknown value.

**So, what should you do?**

Let me add a big disclaimer that everything past this point is purely my interpretation and numbers are best guesses. You should think critically about whether specific points apply to your situation and seek your own data as needed. That said, the sources of data on startup returns and failures are not very good, so you are on your own to interpret them.

### Create some structure
Since you are operating in an information-poor situation, I think it's best to keep things simple and set up an expected value calculation. Choose a few possible outcomes for the share price and assign probabilities to them. Don't forget to subtract your strike price when you calculate the EV (i.e. if the strike price is $2 and one of your possibilities of the share price at IPO is $1, then you would actually lose $1 per share to exercise, so you should assign the value of that possibility to $0).

### Be realistic
Everyone knows a lot of startups fail. One number I've seen is that 75% of venture-backed companies return less than zero dollars to their investors and 30-40% lost all of the investor money. In any situation like that, employees will not make any money. In fact the bar is a bit further, since in many situations investors get money ahead of employees. Which is all to say, a big portion of your probability should go to $0.

Also, the probabilities should go down as the share price goes up. It's pretty unlikely for there to be a 5% chance to hit a share price of $5 and a 10% change to hit a share price of $10.

### Think about the time value of money
How long will it be until the hypothetical liquidity event materializes? If you are joining a Series A company today, if it does manage to IPO, that may not be for 7-10 years. The option grant you are getting today will probably vest in 4 years and then you will have to wait a few more years to actually realize any possible gains.

### An Example
Imagine you have an offer from a series A company that includes options for 1000 shares vesting annually over 4 years. 

Let's create some possibilities for share price - strike price (these numbers are completely made up):
1. $0 - 90% probability
2. $5 - 7% probability
3. $10 - 2.5% probability
4. $20 - 0.5% probability

That makes every share worth, in expectation, worth $0.70 and all of the shares together worth $700. Now let's imagine the company doesn't IPO for 8 years, 4 years after all of your shares have vested. That means four years from now, you will have earned all of your shares, but they are worth $700 four years after that. So applying a conservative 5% (especially at today's interest rates) lump-sum time discounting per year, that means they're only worth $570 when you've earned them in four years.

## Conclusion
There you have it, a detailed look at how to think about valuing your stock options as if they were lottery tickets. In short, think about probabilities of different outcomes, and you're probably better off ignoring the very low probability payoffs if you want a realistic estimate of your earnings.